Observations of Respiratory Syncytial Virus(RSV) Nucleic Acids in Wastewater Solids Across the United States in the 2022−2023 Season: Relationships with RSV Infection Positivity Hospitalization Rates 
Alessandro Zulli,Meri R.J.Varkila, Julie Parsonnet, Marlene K. Wolfe, and Alexandria B.Boehm 
ABSTRACT: Respiratory syncytial virus(RSV) is a leading cause of respiratory illness and hospitalization, but clinical surveillance detects only a minority of cases. Wastewater surveillance could determine the onset and extent of RSV circulation in the absence of sensitive case detection, but to date, studies of RSV in wastewater are few. We measured RSV RNA concentrations in wastewater solids from 176 sitesduring the 2022−2023 RSV season and compared those to publicly available RSVinfection positivity and hospitalization rates. Concentrations ranged from undetectable to 107 copies per gram RSV RNA concentration aggregated at state and national levels correlated with infection  positivity and hospitalization rates. RSV season onset was determined using both wastewater and clinical positivity rates usingindependent algorithms for 14 states where both data were available at the start of the RSV season. In 4 of 14 states, wastewater and clinical surveillance identified RSV seasonon set during the same week; in 3 states,wastewater onset preceded clinical onset, and in 7 states, wastewater onset occurred after clinical onset. Wastewater concentrations generally peaked in the same week as hospitalization rates but after case positivity rates peaked. Differences in onset and peaks in wastewater versus clinical data may reflect inherent differences in the surveillance approaches. KEYWORDS:wastewater-based epidemiology, onset,epidemic pattern, respiratory syncytial virus,RSV,hospitalization rate 
INTRODUCTION Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a leading cause of pediatric pneumonia and bronchiolitis and is responsible for over 100,000 pediatric deaths worldwide each year. In the US, RSV annually accounts for up to 80,000 hospitalizations over 520,000 emergency department visits in children under 5. RSV infects 97% of all children by the age of 2, making it a ubiquitous cause of acute respiratory tract infection in children and a large driver of morbidity and mortality within this cohort.

METHODS 
We conducted a retrospective observational analysis using data on RSV RNA concentrations in wastewater collected as part of this study along with publicly available clinical and laboratory data on RSV test positivity and hospital admissions. Data between January 1, 2022 to July 31,2023 were used.The number of PCR tests performed and the proportion of positive PCR results for RSV were extracted by the state and at a national level directly from the website and are available for each morbidity and mortality weekly report. 